Coming up next is the science fiction radio show, so stay with us.
This is the science fiction radio show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts. This is David Carson and Daryl Lane. Sooner or later a true science
fiction fan has to attend a convention. Conventions range from the incredible Worldcon,
a world science fiction convention with thousands of people in attendance,
to small local gatherings with less than a hundred fans. And then there are the conventions in the
middle, big enough to attract first rank authors and have a fascinating dealers room,
but small enough to create a comfortable, intimate atmosphere between guests and fans.
Such a convention is Aggicon, a yearly science fiction gathering held in College Station, Texas.
Aggicon is organized and run by students at Texas A&M University. At the last Aggicon,
number 14, held in the spring of 1983, we spoke with Gordon Lewis, the head of the Aggicon committee.
We asked him to give us a little of the background behind Aggicon.
Aggicon number one, so far as I know, was not originally called Aggicon. It was just called
the Texas A&M science fiction convention or something to that effect. And they just decided
it would be real fun to invite an author down and have a little miniature convention that lasted
two days. And I think they showed three films. I saw a report on Aggicon 4. I think Aggicon 3 was
the first one that was called Aggicon. I saw a report on number four. They took in a total of
$800 and spent $400. And they had two guests and showed six films total. And that was about all
the programming they had. And since then, we have moved onward and upward to better and better
things to where this year we have 30 guests. We're showing eight major films at night. We have
films running all day long. And we have the panels and the readings. And our budget this year is
something like to take in $15,000 and to spend around $14,000 was what was budgeted.
Putting on a major science fiction convention as Aggicon certainly is takes a good deal of work.
The work is done by a committee on the Texas A&M campus called Cepheid Variable. We asked Lewis
what the word Cepheid Variable meant. A Cepheid Variable is a pulsating star which there is one
in the Cephas star system. And if you look at it, it will appear to grow brighter and dimmer and
occasionally to change colors. And that's where we took our name from. What does Cepheid Variable
actually do? Cepheid Variable is a science fiction and fantasy committee. It's out of the student
programs office here on campus. And because we are a committee, we do programming through the
student programs office. Some of the other clubs on campus do their own activities and programming
just for their own members, but we program for the entire university as well as Aggicon,
which is for people who aren't even members of the university. Is Aggicon the only responsibility
of Cepheid Variable? That's our major reason for being. However, we also program all year long.
We show science fiction fantasy films here on campus. And we are a meeting place for science
fiction fantasy fans here on campus. Also, on occasion, we do send delegates to other conventions
within the state as well as outside the state. Usually in the summertime though,
because most of our students are busy during the fall and spring. Lewis says 95% of the
members of Cepheid Variable are students at the university, but not all. We have a few who are
not. Most of them are like we have one former student. We have one person who is laying out
for a few semesters while he works. And that way he can become a Texas resident and not have to
pay out of state tuition. And Becky Matthews, who is one of our guests, we kind of count her as a
member of the convention committee because she was chairman of Aggicon 11 and has helped us
with the roast program this year. Next time we'll talk with Gordon Lewis about the fascinating
attractions Aggicon has to offer. This has been the science fiction radio show,
production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa
College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the science fiction radio show, so stay with us.
This is the science fiction radio show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts. This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. Aggicon is one of the best known
science fiction conventions in the Southwest. It's held each year on the campus of Texas A&M
University and is organized by the students at the university. Gordon Lewis, the head of the
committee which is responsible for Aggicon, tells us what Aggicon has to offer a science fiction
fan. There of course are the movies. I believe they have movies that are just about every
science fiction convention. We have the dealer's room which you can find just about anything and
everything in there from books to weapons to posters and other kind of paraphernalia from movies
and the world of fantasy. We have the artists and the authors. They sit on panels, some of the
authors do readings for us. We had a NASA presentation yesterday. We have had one of those
for the past three years and we consider that to be pretty regular at this convention. We're
having a slide show this afternoon on Don Penchot's artwork and we try to have an art slide show,
or at least we've been trying to for the past three years. We have the two movie companies
that are here, Disney and Columbia Pictures that are promoting films and I believe that since I've
been here at Aggicon 12 I believe we didn't have any movie promotions but at 11 and 13 and at this
one we have had movie promotions. We have trivia quizzes. We have the amateur art contest. We have
the art auction as well as other stuff that's auctioned off. This year we had the world premiere
performance of Mr. Harry Harrison's play. That is a first as far as I know.
We also have the pro art gallery where pro artists can display their work and the fans can come and
look at it. We have an autograph session, a guest reception. Plus you can usually find the guests
down in the party room if they're not doing anything else.
The authors at this year's Aggicon, the 14th, would have interested any science fiction fan.
Harry Harrison was the guest of honor and there was also a special guest, Stephen R. Donaldson.
Harrison has written science fiction for a long time and is known for such works as the
Death World books and for the stainless steel rat novels. And Donaldson is one of the hottest
fantasy authors working today. His two Chronicles of Thomas Covenant series have sold in the millions.
Lewis says that this year's Aggicon gave more emphasis to one aspect of science fiction and
fantasy that many casual readers don't give much thought to. This year we have really tried to
do more stuff for the artists than we ever have in the past. Usually we have like one panel,
the amateur art contest, the auction and that's about it. And this year we've programmed two panels
on art. We again have the auction and the contest. We have more judges for the contest this year than
we've had in the past. The artist guest of honor was Michael Whelan who for the past two years running
has been given the Nebula Award as the best science fiction fantasy artist of the year.
Anyone who reads science fiction has seen Whelan's work. His paintings are found on the covers of
many science fiction and fantasy books. One of his latest creations was on the dust jacket of Arthur C.
Clark's best-selling novel 2010 Odyssey 2. We asked Lewis how Aggicon compared with other
science fiction conventions in Texas. Well we have been billed as the largest annual science
fiction conventions so far as attendance is concerned. Overall I do believe that we have a
larger attendance if you count both the one day passes as well as the full convention passes than
what other science fiction conventions have. A lot of that is probably due to the students here on
campus but we do bring in quite a few outside individuals. For instance this year we had
60 non-student convention passes for the full convention that were sold in advance.
That means before March 1st. We'll conclude our conversation with Gordon Lewis on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane. We are talking with Gordon Lewis,
head of the Texas A&M Student Committee which put on this year's successful Aggicon.
And this year's Aggicon the 14th has to be considered a success. The guest of honor was
science fiction author Harry Harrison making one of his occasional trips to the United States from
his home in Ireland. The special guest of honor was Stephen R. Donaldson, probably no fantasy
author since Tolkien has sold more books than Donaldson has. His chronicles of Thomas Covenant
one and two have sold in the millions. The activities at Aggicon 14 were numerous and
fascinating. Fans could mingle with the authors and ask questions about their work for one thing
and this opportunity would have to be the heart of any science fiction convention.
But there was also a well-stocked dealer's room, movies 24 hours a day, panels, art shows, a masquerade,
in other words an activity to give a fan a complete immersion in science fiction for almost
four full days. We asked Gordon Lewis how they went about getting authors to be guests of Aggicon.
Well usually what we like to do is there are some authors here in Texas as well as some artists
who are kind of like traditionalists at Aggicon. They've been coming for several years.
We try and invite all of them and usually most of them will come come down here.
So far as our major guests we have the guest of honor and we have a special guest. This year
we were going to have co-guests of honor. We were going to have Anne McCaffrey as well as Harry
Harrison but Anne had to back out because of medical problems. Harry Harrison was then left as our
only guest of honor which in the past we've only had one. We have our special guest like I said
we have a toast master. This year is Dr. Chad Oliver from the University of Texas and he will
be presenting a program at the banquet this evening. He said he'd give us 15 minutes of
wit and humor. Chad Oliver has been writing science fiction for over 30 years and has been a regular
feature at Aggicon. Some of the other local authors attending Aggicon 14 were Howard Waldrop,
Lee Kennedy, Ardeth Mehar and George Proctor. The out-of-state writers included Ed Bryant and
Bob Varterman. We asked Lewis what the biggest problem in planning Aggicon was. The fact that
all of the officers are students and we all have our homework here from the University plus all
of the paperwork that is required. And I think the only reason that was a real problem at this
convention was because none of the paperwork was done when I took over in mid-October. I ended
up in the middle of a school. Aggicon is put together by student committee at Texas A&M University
known as Cepheid Variable. We wondered if the students joined the committee because they were
serious science fiction fans are just for social reasons. Both really. The majority of the people
in there are really interested in science fiction. I myself am very interested in science fiction and
fantasy and it is a pretty nice social atmosphere also. The majority of the people in the committee
are real good friends and we get along real well. How many students from Cepheid Variable work on
the convention? We have our member right 16 officers, eight of those have assistants and we
have probably 10 of what we termed gophers which means general officer for everything ridiculous.
Basically they are the peons in your organization that go and do everything
that the rest of us don't have time for. And then so far as workers at the convention, just general
people, committee members that worked are probably another 10 to 20 of those. Lewis says the experience
of putting on Aggicon is worthwhile but I would say that no one should criticize the way a science
fiction fantasy convention is run until they've been on my end of the deal. Because until you have
tried to set one of these things up you really don't have any understanding as to what it takes to do
so. All of the paperwork and all of the correspondence that has to be done. It really is a very big job
and I'm sure that this year I could not have done it without the help of all my officers.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Ayn and David Carson. The Science Fiction of Dean Ayn is always exciting and fast
paced, making it difficult for readers to put his books down. But his work also has messages to it,
some information, some opinions that Ayn wishes to communicate through the entertaining and exciting
narrative. Anasazi, systemic shock, and soft targets are all good examples of exciting science
fiction novels by Ayn which carry some messages or information along with the story. Ayn bases his
writing on ideas which he's interested in at the time he writes. He tells us about some of his
interests. There are a couple of themes that have occupied me a lot.
One of them other people have begun to come up to, begun to work on such that I can move on to
something else again, I would say that sensible transportation, mass transit, cars that get
50 to 100 miles a gallon, things like that, things that I was demonstrating working on,
building cars that got 50 miles a gallon 20 years ago when nobody else cared. Now a lot of people care
and now I'm not interested in it much anymore because it's already been, not because of me
really, but for whatever reason it has been taken up as an important issue. The second thing
along that line would be survival. Not only nuclear survival but various other kinds. I write in
survival publications. I design backpackers wood stoves and all kinds of other gadgetry
that would be very useful in survival contexts. I've had to make my own snowshoes to get out of
the high Sierra on one particular summer, which was hardly like a summer at all. It was a very
late spring, but survival in particular in the nuclear holocaust survival issue is one that I
have dealt with for two or three years now.
Inge's latest book is a good example of his method of writing about his immediate concerns.
It's called Pulling Through and it's based on the theme of survival.
Inge says he normally tries to proportion his stories between 90% entertainment and 10%
information, but pulling through is a slight departure from that formula.
In the context of a great big overbearing and overwhelming bounty hunter in California,
the kind of guy who goes around with weapons all the time and has a fairly high tech environment,
he's a man around whom things just happen and they happen fast.
Pulling Through is definitely not a dull novel. It's a fresh experiment in science fiction and one that will
fascinate readers. We hope Inge continues to include information in his books along with the
narrative. That's really what science fiction is all about anyhow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane.
Donald A. Walheim has been involved in science fiction for over half a century.
His influence has been and still is considerable.
He was one of the original fans back in the 30s and helped start the famous science fiction group
The Futurians in New York in the late 1930s. He's written numerous novels and short stories.
He's been an editor of science fiction for 40 years and was responsible for the creation of
the Ace Science Fiction Line. And today he's head of Dawes Science Fiction books,
the publishing house he founded in 1972. Obviously, Walheim knows science fiction
inside and out. We asked him to comment on science fiction as a separate category of literature.
Isn't that distinction between science fiction and other fiction, particularly mainstream,
really an artificial one maintained by the publishing industry?
Well, let me put it this way. It is an artificial category. All literature is literature.
But for the purposes of marketing, it is necessary to mark out the different genres or categories
of what you might call standard reading. This derives from the fact of the old days of the
pulp magazine when a magazine was clearly marked a western or a detective magazine or a science
fiction magazine. And because it knew that readers who bought that magazine knew what they were going
to get, mainstream is a very varied product. It consists of a story, books of modern adventure,
books of future life, books of past life, books of historical, just experimental work. It can be
anything. And your reader of category literature, which is actually I think the vast majority,
know what they want. What they want is similar to what they have been reading.
But they don't really want to jump into something which is outside that which
takes them into an escape. They are reading for escape readers. So you market science fiction
because that's what they're looking for. You market a western if that's what they happen to like.
If your western reader picks up something which is mainstream, he isn't going to like it. It doesn't
give him what he's seeking. It's the same thing with romance novels. So you have to make it a
category whether the writer is like it or not. This is good for marketing. If you go into any
bookshop, a large pay-back bookshop, you'll see that they do this. They mark, they put it in
separate areas. They market science fiction, they market romance because they know that people are
coming looking for that type of literature. A science fiction novel published as a mainstream work
unless it's marvelously good, a very well advertised, instead of being lost, it'll be forgotten, it
won't even be seen. And it certainly won't be reviewed by the people who read science fiction.
They will tell each other. So this is for your own protection, for the author's protection,
and for very sound economic reasons you do have to list it as a category.
Some people say that science fiction is treated as the second class form of literature by critics,
that it's unfairly neglected because it is a category literature. We ask Walheim's opinion on
the notion. Well, I am forced to agree with those people. The mainstream literature is in a sense
regarded as the literature by, let's say, professors of English and by book critics.
And things which are marked in a category style are looked down upon as hack writing.
I see that happen, of course, living in New York. You see the New York Times book,
which was probably one of the most snob-organized in the country,
which they will never review science fiction books if they can help it.
No matter what the critics think, if you like science fiction, you'll like what
Donald A. Walheim's Dahl books puts out.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.